---
layout: post
title:  "Referencing Object Keys in Typescript"
date:   2017-06-18 11:12:54 -0500
categories: feature
author: Justin Bakse
poster_image:
---

Javascript is very flexible about types. Imagine you have an object that represents a color, like this:

```javascript
myColor = {
    red: 1.0,
    green: .5,
    blue: 0
};
```

You can read and write properties on that object using both dot and bracket notation, try to read properties that don't exist, and even add properties on at will.

```javascript
myColor.red             // read red (1.0)
myColor.red = 1.0       // write red
myColor["green"]        // read green (.5)
myColor["green"] = .5   // write green
myColor.alpha           // read an undefined property (undefined)
myColor.alpha = 1.0     // create and write a property
myColor["alpha"] = 1.0  // works too
```

Bracket notation will even let you access a property by a name stored in a variable.

```javascript
targetChannel = "red";
myColor[targetChannel] // read red (1.0)
```

This can be pretty handy, PBR5 uses this in a few places. It is also a little dangerous, its pretty easy to specify a key that doesn't exist.

```javascript
targetChannel = "silver";
myColor[targetChannel] // silver doesn't exist so (undefined)
```

## Typescript
This is the sort of thing that [Typescript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/index.html) helps with. Typescript provides type checking for Javascript, warning you when your code might have type errors at compile-time instead of run-time (or not at all).

Given the example above, Typescript can infer the structure of `myColor`, and warn you when you try to access a key that doesn't exist.

```javascript
let myColor = {
    red: 1.0,
    green: 0.5,
    blue: 0.0
}

myColor.red; // okay
myColor.silver; // warning: Property 'silver' does not exist on type '{ red: number; green: number; blue: number; }'
myColor["red"]; // okay
myColor["silver"]; // warning: Element implicitly has an 'any' type because type '{ red: number; green: number; blue: number; }' has no index signature.
```

Typescript gives us a warning when we try to access the nonexistent property named `silver`.

The first error message is pretty clear, but the second one, about index signatures, may not be. Typescript understands that sometimes we may want want to add and read keys dynamically. If we wanted to in this case, we could specify an **index signature** to tell typescript what types of data we'll be working with. In this case though, we *want* typescript to warn us when we use a property name that doesn't exist, so providing an index signature isn't what we want.
{:.info}

When we use a string literal in brackets—`myColor["red"]`—Typescript is able to verify that a matching key exists. A name stored in a `const` would work also. But if we use a variable, Typescript infers the type as a string and can't guarentee that all strings will properly name a key.

```javascript
let targetChannel = "red";
myColor[targetChannel]; // warning
```

We need a way to tell Typescript that `targetChannel` isn't a general `string`, but will always be "red", "green", or "blue".

## Helping Typescript Out

We need a way to define a new type, narrower than string. This type should
- only allow assignment of values in a user defined set of strings
- work as a `[]` index for objects that have keys for each string
- work even if the object has additional keys than are not in our list
- support auto complete in the editor

There are a few approaches we might consider.

### Approach 1, Enums
Specifying a type that consists of a specific set of values, an enumerated type or enum, is supported in a number of languages. Typescript does support enums, but they are numeric rather than string-based. Also, Typescript allows any number to be assigned to a enum-typed variable even if its not in the enumerated set.

### Approach 2, keyof
Typescript has a `keyof` operators for building types based on the keys of objects: `type ChannelName = keyof typeof myColor;`. If we wanted every key in the object to be a valid value for ChannelName, this works great. This doesn't work if we only want some of our object properties in our list of possible values.

### Approach 3, String Literal Types
Typescript's string literal specifies an exact value a string must have. Combining this with Typescript's unnion type allow us to create a type that allows values from a list. Since variables of this new type will always be one of a set of values, Typescript can warn us when we try to use bad value and check that the variable names a key when we use it in a bracket index.

```javascript
type ChannelName = "red" | "green" | "blue";
let targetChannel:ChannelName = "red";
let targetChannel2:ChannelName = "silver"; // warning: Type '"silver"' is not assignable to type 'ChannelName'.
myColor[targetChannel]; // okay!
```

This gives us the type safety we are looking for. We can go a step further and create a set of constants so that we don't have the string literals in our code and will benefit from autocompletion in our editor. Putting it all together:

```javascript
let myColor = {
    red: 1.0,
    green: 0.5,
    blue: 0.0
}

type ChannelName = "red" | "green" | "blue";
const ChannelNames = {
    red: <ChannelName>"red",
    green: <ChannelName>"green",
    blue: <ChannelName>"blue"
}

let targetChannel = ChannelNames.red;
// targetChannel's type will infered as ChannelName
myColor[targetChannel]; // okay!
```
This is the approach I am using in PBR5, at least for now.

### Approach 4, strEnum()

Basarat Ali Syed's fantastic online book [TypeScript Deep Dive](https://basarat.gitbooks.io/typescript/content/) offers a utility function for creating string based enums. This function lets us cut down the boiler plate for declaring the type and creating the constants to just this:

```javascript
const ChannelNames = strEnum(['red','green','blue']);
type ChannelName = keyof typeof ChannelNames;
```

Unfortunately though, Typescript with this approach Typescript infers the type of targetChannel as a string unless we explicity declare that targetChannel is a Channel Name.

```javascript
let targetChannel = ChannelNames.red; // inferred type string
myColor[targetChannel]; // warning
```
```javascript
let targetChannel: ChannelName = ChannelNames.red; // type ChannelName
myColor[targetChannel]; // okay!
```

### Approach 5, Typescript 2.4

[Typescript 2.4](https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/typescript/2017/06/12/announcing-typescript-2-4-rc/) which is in release candidate stage (as of June 12, 2017) is introducing string-based enums. I havn't tried the RC, but there is a pretty good chance that these will be the best approach moving forward.
