---
layout: post
title:  "Texturing a Brick Wall Without Hitting a Brick Wall"
date:   2017-06-13 21:12:54 -0500
categories: shaders
author: Talia Cotton
---

test out initial version of api

Simple Bricks Now
Misstep 1
Misstep 2
Complex Now
Revision 1
Final Version

couple of selected snippets code

A couple of lighting scenarios.

Pretty pictures

Pain Points most pressing things you want api to do channel masking rotation?



Using the API to build a brick texture -- as the first implementation of the API -- was a good exploration of its potential, as well as a good indication of other functions from which the API would benefit.

The general process to set up the grid was as follows:
1. Establish the dimensions of each brick, as well as the space between them (the mortar). Define these as variables, so they can be changed later.
2. Loop through the canvas, and draw a rectangle (a brick, using pbr.rect) of the predefined brick size at every x,y point of the start of a brick. Keeping in mind: every other row the x-start is half a brick-width sooner. This gives it more of an organic brick "feel". (in code, this means every other row starts at x - brickWidth/2).

Then to add a simple material:
At this stage, there are only two parts being drawn: the canvas below the bricks (the mortar), as well as each brick. This translates to the first two Materials. The canvas/mortar material (1) was initially given a grey-ish color, and a height of 0.1. The bricks material (2) was also a simple color and height, but the loop gave the opportunity to diversify the color of each brick. With a random function written outside the pbr function, a random variation of color was applied to each brick.

At this point the Simple Bricks texture (albedo channel shown here) was set up. In a sentence: make a brick material, draw a series of procedurally positioned rectangles with that material, whose r g and b values get slightly modified at every instance. Already it looks like ~something~.

Observing existing brick textures, a few qualities were noted
