---
layout: post
title:  "Hello, PBR5"
date:   2017-06-08 21:12:54 -0500
categories: shaders
author: Justin Bakse
poster_video: /media/eater.mov
---

## What PBR5 is

Most digital images—and most digital image authoring software—represent images as pixels that encode only the image’s color. These images do not describe other properties such as how shiny, metallic, or thick each pixel is. These material properties are important expressive aspects of traditional media image-making; their absence often leads to “flat” or “lifeless” images.

Image: RGB Textured Object
Image: RGB+ Texture Object

[Creating richer, more lifelike images is difficult especiall for] creative-field students are first learning digital image-making and creative coding. This, in turn, can contribute to reduced student interest in creative coding.

[pros also need tools for creating these textures in their realitme graphics pipelines for games, VR and other realtime apps. Substance designer is great, but its node based approach makes is great for some things, inconvient for others]

The goal of this project is to create a prototype of a javascript library for creating procedurally generated images that contain extended information representing these additional material properties.

and to explore using this library in educational contexts [and pro contexts] to connect the disciplines of creative coding, 3D rendering, VR, and traditional media.

## Physically Based Rendering
Most digital images, and most digital image authoring software and libraries, represent images as pixels that encode only the image’s color. These images and packages do not describe other properties of the image such as how shiny, metallic, or thick each pixel is. These material properties are important expressive aspects of traditional media image-making.

Physically Based Rendering (PBR) is method of 3D rendering which seeks to simulate the real-world interactions of light and materials more accurately than previous rendering models. PBR materials use multiple images (maps) to represent material properties such as albedo (color), roughness, metallic response, emissive color, and height.

Tools for creating and rendering PBR materials have become more widespread in the past few years. Unity 3D, a real-time engine used for game and interactive application development, introduced PBR support in 2015. Authoring packages such as Substance Designer, Substance Painter, and Quixel, allow artists to work with this more expressive representation of images using familiar tools. Combining this pipeline with VR enables powerful tools for creating virtual prototypes and material studies very quickly.

Unity takes images like this:

image: map 1
image: map 2
image: map 3

And simulates light to create

image: rendering


[something about psudeo code]
image: imagined output

## Goals

This project would include: designing, developing, documenting, and publishing the prototype library; testing the library with students and creative-coding community members; and hosting a community hackathon.

- one
- two
- three

Strech goals?
